And we're sitting in the living room of the Rogers
residence getting ready for me to interview John
Rogers about his experiences here first as a
student and then as a member of the professional
staff and faculty. Now, John, would you say a
sentence? We'll test your recorder. I came to A&M
in 1936. Okay, now.
I attended Rice from 1933 to 1936 and then
transferred to A&M in the fall of 36. I
came to A&M in 1936 and went to school for two years
to complete my bachelor's degree in 1938.
1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 4. Okay. Do
I need to talk louder? No, just hold it up. John, to
begin with, would you give a stranger who might
listen to this or read it later a summary of where
you grew up and get us to A&M? Your growing up and
your Rice experience and what you majored in and
then We'll move you up here. All right, Haskell,
I'll be glad to do that. Just briefly, I was born in
Arkansas. I want to be sure and get that on the
record. My father was a Presbyterian minister, so
we moved around quite a bit and lived in Oklahoma
when I was real young and started to school and then
moved to Houston, Texas when I was in about the
third grade, I believe that was back in 1925. I went
through regular school, on through high school,
graduating from John Reagan High School in 1933.
And I went on to school then at Rice, since as you
know Rice University is located in Houston and is
quite a good school, and certainly a motivating
force in 1933. was the fact that nobody had any
money. So I could go to Rice for not much more
expense than I actually had in high school. At the
time, Rice had no tuition, and you may recall that
the founder, William Morris Rice, had
established the institution as a means of helping
students who were unable to afford college
education otherwise. So one stipulation was that
no tuition was to be charged.
I attended Rice just taking an academic course, I
believe that's what it was called in those days,
for three years. You can well wonder how being
raised in Houston, that was a big city even then
comparatively, would be interested in
agriculture, but I spent a lot of summers on the
grandparents farm in Arkansas and always been
associated with farms and agricultural life.
Also, moving around a lot, I didn't have any one
place as a base, at least to some extent, so I always
felt Arkansas was sort of home, since my parents
were both from there and all their forebears.
Anyway, after spending the summer of, I believe it
was 1936, on the farm in Arkansas, I decided, well,
I'd go into agriculture. I was ready to start
farming, as far as that goes, but my father was a
factor at that time, and while he never did
absolutely insist on something, he strongly
encouraged it, plus the fact that he was paying the
bills. So we came up to A&M evaluate the situation
in the summer of 36, and sure enough, I started A&M
then in the fall of 1936 as a transfer student from
Rice. Describe that visit up here. What did you do?
How did you get here? What did you do? Who showed you
around? Well, again, let me remind you, this was
1936, so that's 60-something years ago. Anyway,
my father and I drove up here, And I don't believe
either one of us had ever been to the A&M campus
prior to that. And I recall looking around the
campus and going to the administration building,
which was the main building at that time, and where
all the administrative offices and the
registrar's office was located. And somehow we
got an audience with the current registrar, E.J.
Howell, whom I'm sure... you're familiar with and
is well known in Aggieland and so forth. So we
visited with him for, I don't know, a couple hours,
I'd say. He was very considerate and I was
surprised that a registrar at that time would be
willing to spend a couple hours with some
individual student just wanting to transfer to
A&M. But I'd say he did a real good job of it.
Everything seemed to work out well, so we decided
on the way home that that's where I'd go. So that was
probably up in August, late August then, so I came
on up here in a couple of weeks. Did you walk around
the campus, you and your dad? I don't recall
walking, no, I don't believe so. We may have driven
through it. Of course, there wasn't nearly as much
on the campus, so to speak, as there is today, but I
really don't have much recollection other than
the conversation with the registrar. That made
quite an impression on us, and we remembered that.
So then you come back soon after that first visit to
enroll. Describe that arrival and how you got
located into a dormitory and so forth. Well, I
guess the first statement I'd like to make, being a
transfer student at A&M is a challenge. Well, let
me talk about the enrollment first, since it
involves one of the historical A&M faculty. I went
through the registration line along with the
other students and signed up for courses, various
ones that the advisors counseled me I could take.
And of course, fitting a schedule in is a real
challenge, especially I'd already been to
college three years, so I didn't want to spend the
rest of my life taking undergraduate courses. So I
wanted to get as much credit, one, as I could from
the Rice courses, and also to enroll for as many
courses per semester. So I had a schedule all
figured out that finally totaled 23 hours. I
believe that's correct. I really do. And it was a
real challenge. to fit that many in that would
apply on my degree. And I finally got this all done
and went around to get the final approval from some
of the authorities, and I happened to encounter
Dean Bolton, whom everyone knew at the time, and of
course since then, he later became president.
Well, he's a fine old man, but I surely got
aggravated with him that day. He looked at my... My
schedule and transcript and so forth said well i'm
sorry you're a transfer student here so we're not
sure that you can meet the challenges of the nm
academic. situation so we're going to have to
reduce your hours. And I immediately bristled up
at this. Gee, I made good grades at Rice. What are
you talking about? It didn't seem to have much
impact on him. Maybe negative. I'm not sure. But I
remember the incident real well at the time. But he
won out. He was in charge and I wasn't. And I think he
cut the hours back to 18 and said, well, we'll see
how you do this semester. Then we'll Let it go on
from there, and I might add, I took 23 hours every
other semester as an undergraduate at A&M. Now,
your major at Rice was listed as what? Academic,
just what you'd call liberal arts. I just took
conventional courses, English, foreign
language, a science course. Then up here, what was
your major? Agronomy. Describe... for someone
that might not have known Dean Bolton, describe
him physically and his characteristics? Well,
I'm sure you're familiar with his name, the
student name given to him, Bear Tracks, and he was
like that somewhat. He was a very bulky sort of
fella, not real tall. I don't He was under six feet,
I would think, but very broad and muscular,
strout-looking individual and somewhat gruff in
his speech, but I came to know him much better after
the years following. In fact, we went to the same
church for a while, and he's just a wonderful
person. He was a stickler for rules, and whatever
the book said, that was going to be it. Where did you
live that first year? I lived in Law Hall. Is it
still standing? I believe so. It seemed like they
were going to tear some of those halls down. I'm not
sure whether it is or not. Whether it survived or
not, there was quite an opposition to tearing some
of them down. What outfit was that? 2nd
Headquarters Field Artillery. Do you have any
idea how you got assigned to that unit? Yes. Before
I came up to school here, say a couple weeks before
I'd already decided to go here and I knew a number of
friends from the John Reagan era lived in Houston
Heights there who were in A&M so I counseled some of
them and talked to them and there were a number of
the local boys in that particular battery, the
headquarters battery so I guess I just requested
it and was able to get in. I think they would let you
go where you wanted to as long as there was no reason
to exclude you or if there was room in that
particular outfit for you. Describe the life of a
transfer in 1936. Confusing. And sometimes
difficult. I'll do the best I can on that. The
system at that, particularly at that time where it
was all core and all masculine, there might have
been a, I could probably count the quote, day
students on my hand. There were students who lived
in the project houses, but they were in the ROTC
also. So it was for all practical purposes, 100%
core members. A transfer doesn't have a home. You
don't fit in anywhere. You're not a fish. And, you
know, there's a certain camaraderie among the
fish. They all suffer, and they all serve, and they
commiserate with each other. Well, they didn't
know exactly at the time where to put me. I'd say
when I moved in the first day of school, I was placed
in a room with two fish, and I was a fish at that time,
I guess you'd say, and stayed there for years. I'd
say a couple of months, quite a little while. And I
don't know just how or why this came about. I guess
the battery officers and some of the faculty
decided that juniors, I was a classified junior at
that time, should be a fish and living with fish,
and I guess relegated would be a reasonable term to
all the activities that the fish encountered at
that time. So after about two months, they
decided, well, I shouldn't be treated as a fish,
but I wasn't quite an upperclassman either
because I'd never gone through the fish ordeal,
which is fair enough, I'd say. So I was put in a room
with two juniors who probably weren't too
thrilled about this since they were bona fide A&M
juniors, whereas I was a transfer junior. They may
have called me a junior fish at that time. I'm not
sure just what I recall. I've heard that a transfer
is sometimes called a frog. Were you called a frog?
Never to my recollection, and my... definition of
a frog was one who started at midterm at that time.
That's the only particular
term. Did you get any hazing, initiation like a
freshman would? Yes. When I was living as a
freshman, I adhered to all the freshman
requirements. I had a room to clean up along with my
roommates and of course we're and had to meet all
the, say, freshman requirements. You couldn't go
to bed before, I don't remember, 10 o'clock,
10.30, and had to be in bed by 11, and had to be up at 6
and get the rooms cleaned up, and all the other
various things that freshmen did. Oh, I remember
one incident where I certainly qualified as a
freshman. Are you familiar with the... concept of
airing out. At that time, I don't know how long it
was carried on, but the fish were required to leave
the dormitory about, I think, four or five in the
morning. This was later in the year. I think it was
in the spring, but it was still kind of chilly, and
all of us were Run out of the dormitory with
practically no clothes on. I think I had a pair of
shorts, literally, was all I had. And we were
driven down to, my recollection is Wellburn or
Milliken, somewhere down the road there, and just
dumped out unceremoniously on the highway. And
that was kind of an experience to get your
attention. But I was fortunate. I got out on the
highway and thumbed a ride, and some trucker
stopped. I guess he was considerate anyway. He
wondered what anybody was doing out there without
any clothes on that time of day and brought me back
to A&M. When there was a paddle session... Did you
get treated those first weeks like a freshman when
the paddles were brought out? I was paddled a few
times, but not to the extent the regular fish were.
At that time, I was paddling all up and down the
river. All the classes, seniors paddled juniors,
juniors paddled sophomores, et cetera. So I think
I got my share as a junior fish, so to speak, when I
got up there. But I didn't get nearly the amount
that the regular fish did. Do you have a
recollection of what the cost was of that first
year for you and your family? I think it's about $50
a month for everything, but I have the figure $400,
$450 for a year.
Did you have any spending money, a kind of an
allocation?
No. I don't recall a whole lot. My parents were
supporting me in school. I had worked, of course,
before when I lived in Houston and had some money,
but there wasn't a whole lot you could spend money
on there unless you left town on the weekends,
which I didn't do so much my first semester. I guess
it's true of most Aggies. After you stay a while,
you leave more and more frequently on the
weekends. Academically, how did you find the
rigor of the A&M academic program compared to the
Rice program?
Rice is a more rigorous academic school, and I
don't mean that as a derogatory remark about the
A&M. The courses varied quite a bit, and there'd be
some courses that would be comparable to the Rice
courses. If you'll permit me to tell you one story
about, this relates to Rice, but it bears on. At
Rice, I was taking academic courses, and you're
required to take one science course each year.
This doesn't speak too highly of me, but anyway, I
got to my junior year, and I was looking for a
science course that didn't have a lab. I wasn't to
an average spending a full afternoon in a lab,
so... I ended up signing up for a psychology
course, since it's construed as a science. That
may be debatable, but anyway. It was a big class,
two or three hundred people in the lecture, and I
believe the professor's name was Dr. Patty.
just to show that Rice is not all top notch. He was
not a good prof in all fairness. And I was not a good
student either, I might add in that case. Anyway,
this is my junior year, and at Rice they grade by
one, two, three, or did them by one, two, three,
four, five. And I had done reasonably well my first
two years, but the junior year I was, doing better i
guess i'd gotten accustomed to the situation some
i was taking five courses at the time and they don't
give you any grades still well they give you grades
the end of the semester but the courses were all
year courses you stayed them all year so my i got my
report card at the mid mid year and it had four ones
and a five in psychology I knew I hadn't done well.
It was a lost cause as far as I was concerned, but I
did want to pass the course. There was a rule at Rice
then as a junior, you could only take five courses.
If you failed one of your five courses, you had to
drop one and only go back to four, the theory being
that you weren't capable of keeping up with five,
so you go back to four. So I went into the registrar
and he looked at that report card and just shook his
head and said, what's the matter with you? If you
can make ones in other four courses, surely you can
do better than a failing grade in psychology. I
said, well, I really haven't done well. And I just
wanted to be sure I didn't have to drop the course
though. So he said, well, you go around to your
psychology prof and talk to him about it see what he
says so i went around to the prof now i'll never
forget his expression that day he looked at the
report card and then saw the five on there for
psychology and then finally looked at happened to
see my name rogers oh rogers i remember now i said
you know what you did you took my core of my
psychology course for a whole semester and when
you wrote the name of the course on your term on your
term exam you spelled it piscology and said i'm not
going to pass anybody you can't even spell spell
the name of the course after taking it a full full
semester i got the biggest kick out of that but that
was a that was a fact that no but see i had another
semester you let me stay in there and i i finally
ended up with a four but i I learned how to spell
psychology out
of it. Now, you were a junior. You took two
undergraduate years here. Correct. But I took
almost the equivalent of, I don't know, at least
two and a half by taking excessive hours per
semester. During those two years, who were some of
the key faculty and staff members that you now
remember proudly? Who were some of the good people
that you encountered? During my two years of
undergraduate work, uh... let me start in some
sequence or i'll forget some and i think i can
remember them pretty well while i was majoring in
agronomy so uh... dr trotter was the head of the
agronomy teaching department at that time and
i've always held him in high regard i didn't take
any courses under him but i had p trotter and uh...
others in the agronomy department
took courses under and were excellent
professors. Dr. Luther Jones, I'm sure you've run
into him in some of your discussions with other
people. He was a soil professor there, although
he's better known for lending money to students
and faculty and anyone else who will borrow from
him to obtain houses and go through school and so
forth. Cotton Joe Mogford, if you're recall that
name, was also in the department at that time, and
he was the cotton expert, very fine gentleman.
R.C. Potts, who later became dean of agriculture,
I'm sure you know him, was one of the professors
there, and he had just started. He was fairly young
and come down from Oklahoma in him at the time. Did
he have a nickname? I don't recall it if he did. I
don't remember hearing about him. R.C. No, I
believe that he was a grass expert, but I don't
remember anyone giving him that nickname. Red
Thompson was another. I don't know whether you've
heard of him much or not. He later went on to Iowa
State at Ames and became, I guess he was dean of
agriculture up there in the administration.
Those were the main professors in the agronomy
department itself. I
don't remember the names of a lot of the professors
in some of the other areas. I do remember the
chemistry professors, if you need to hear
anything about them. Well, Dr. Hedges was head of
the Department of Chemistry, and the student name
for him was Steppenhalf, which I'm sure you've run
into before. Kind of a thoughtless name for him
since he was crippled and shuffled along like
that. R.C.,
I've forgotten his initials, Snuggs, I don't know
whether you've run into him, encountered him as
another of the chemistry profs. And perhaps the
most colorful was Heddy and Jones. No? Well, gee, I
thought everybody knew him. That was his student
name, Head End Jones. I believe he was the one that
lived on the campus and had all the roses there. No,
maybe not. Anyway, he was an unusual character.
quite volatile in the way he described things or
discussed them. He mainly taught laboratory. I
remember one incident where we were running some
kind of experiment in the lab and You know,
chemistry is a little uncertain a lot of the time,
so all of us were asking him what to do and this,
that, and the other in the laboratory. And some
student, fortunately it wasn't me this time,
asked him about what shall I do about this acid. He
had a beaker full of it or something. He hit in and
said, well, don't you know? I said, I'm sorry, I
just don't know what to do. He said, well, go ahead,
pour it in the pot. The container over there, smoke
filled the room and everything. Now you'll know
how to find out things. That would be typical of
him. He'd be glad to tell you to do something to
emphasize it. Anyway, I almost lived in the
chemistry lab or department one semester. It
seemed like I was making up hours in chemistry that
I hadn't had previously. I had at least three
courses over there, I know of. As you look back on
your life, which of those undergraduate courses
was the most important to you? I haven't come to
that one yet, and I'll go ahead and mention it. My
genetics course was, and the one professor to
which I attribute having the most impact and
actual effect on my life was Professor C.B.
Godbey. I don't know whether you, well, he's a
wonderful person and a marvelous teacher. And as
an aside, I never have taken this on as a project,
but like he's someone the university should
really recognize for what he did during his career
here. He was very mild-mannered, unassuming
person. and didn't project himself but any of the
agricultural students and particularly on into
graduate school will just held him in the highest
regard both personally and professionally
anyway i happen to have him as my genetics
professor and i enjoyed genetics
and did reasonably well in it. And it was Mr. Godby
who recommended me for an assistantship and to go
on to graduate school and therefore enabled me to
start a career after college. So I really am most in
debt to him as one individual. And I'd say the
people in the agronomy department, Potts,
Trotter, Jones, and so forth, Was there anyone
outside the faculty that you learned to turn to for
advice? Was there anyone
anywhere else? On the campus, for example? Well,
yes, I would say M.L. Cashin was one that I talked
to. Describe Mr. Cashin. Well, He was just a
wonderful individual and I'll tell you how I came
in contact with him initially and then I continued
to visit with him during my years here. My father
knew him or knew of him and they traced back to North
Carolina relations and I guess they thought they
might have even had some common relations anyway
when My father was here on the campus a time too,
very early when I was in school. He looked up Mr.
Cashin and introduced me to him. So I always felt
like I could go to him and did. talked to him at times
and he was just just a great person thought so much
of students and being in the center of the campus
there at YMCA well I know he was a tremendously
positive force for all A&M students. Physically
if I I never did know him Would the two sons that you
and I do know, are they similar in appearance to
their father?
I don't remember Mr. Cashin having red hair, but in
fact, he didn't have much hair at all, as I recall
him. Jim reminds me more of his father than Red
does. I don't know. It would be interesting to see
what they think, but... And it seems to me it has
more of the characteristics of his father, just a
real solid, wonderful individual, and always
wanted to be helpful and to think of the other
people. I believe Red probably is more forceful or
outgoing, and I guess their careers probably
illustrate this. And who was, during those
student days, who was the president?